Editor’s Note: This is the second of a five-part series that tells the story of the closing months of the 2024 presidential campaign, starting with the June debate between President Joe Biden and former President Donald Trump. Read the first here.

It’s a warm Saturday afternoon, there’s a threat of rain, and the neighbors are being noisy. A hundred protesters are shouting in front of the White House, telling the man who lives there they admire him, they appreciate what he’s done, and now he needs to get out.

“Hey hey, ho ho, thank you, Joe, it’s time to go!”

The success of former President Donald Trump’s campaign is becoming a catastrophe for sitting President Joe Biden. The pressure on him to step out of the race has been growing inversely to his fading performance since the Fourth of July. Every few days another incremental creep in the polls pushes him toward that undetermined edge at which his chances of winning reelection will go from long to lost.

Trump’s coalition is drawing tighter by the day, and White evangelical Christians are a key component. If any group in Trump land embodies his ethos of feeling besieged, it is this one. In the early 1970s, 90% of Americans identified as Christian. By 2020 it was 64%. And the Pew Research Center notes, “If recent trends in religious switching continue, Christians could make up less than half of the U.S. population within a few decades.”

So when Trump delivered their long-awaited destruction of Roe v. Wade, they celebrated. And when he promises to bring them back to political power, they listen. “We have to bring back our religion,” he told the National Religious Broadcasters group earlier this year. “We have to bring back Christianity in this country.”

A shrewd breakdown by Shadi Hamid in The Washington Post notes after Trump nodded to Christian nationalism in 2016 and evangelicals helped him win, membership in evangelical churches grew – fueled by Trump supporters looking for a home. “They became evangelicals because of what it meant politically,” he wrote. “Among White Trump supporters who were not evangelicals in 2016, 16 percent began to identify as evangelical by 2020, suggesting again that politics rather than religion was the driving factor.”

For Biden, the committed Catholic, it would seem a particularly bitter pill, especially now as his team and journalists following him are tracking his fortunes by the day – sometimes by the hour – through an agony of indecision.

“There were so many ups and downs,” CNN’s MJ Lee says. “And I remember thinking to myself, ‘Am I going to sound like I’m over the top if I go on the air saying Democrats are panicked?’”

Biden does not admit any weakness publicly, but his team is sandbagging against a rising river of that panic, much of it from powerful Democrats questioning whether he is still the right person to take on Trump. Trying to recover from the disastrous debate, Biden sits down with ABC’s George Stephanopoulos and mentions he had a cold. “I was sick,” Biden says. “I was feeling terrible.”

With NBC’s Lester Holt, Biden acknowledges he had a “bad, bad night,” but bridles at the notion of stepping aside. “Fourteen million people voted for me to be the nominee in the Democratic Party, OK? I listen to them.”

Allies, including House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries, take to the media circuit. “Joe Biden has confronted and had to come back from tragedy, trials, from tribulations throughout his entire life,” the New York Democrat says, “so the moment that we’re in right now is a comeback moment.”

Sen. Chris Coons, from Biden’s home state of Delaware, is unequivocal on ABC’s “This Week”: “The only Democrat who has ever beaten Donald Trump is Joe Biden. He is our candidate for November.”

It is Biden’s most compelling argument. In the grinding, Covid-haunted 2020 race, he was the wise, old warrior who drew suburban voters, women and young people to his side. His long-standing ties to the working class and organized labor helped nudge him across the finish line to a narrow but clear victory. But now, the tightening vise squeezes Biden into the highly unusual position of sending a letter to congressional Democrats. “I want you to know that despite all the speculation in the press and elsewhere,” he writes, “I am firmly committed to staying in this race, to running this race to the end, and to beating Donald Trump.”

He also keeps hammering Trump’s vulnerabilities – the former president’s criminal record, the myriad cases still hovering, the January 6, 2021, riot, the Supreme Court overturning Roe v. Wade – hoping to crack the mogul’s gathering edge in the polls. One potential weakness in particular draws Biden’s attention.

“Project 2025 is the biggest attack on our system of government and our personal freedom that has ever been proposed,” the president bellows during a fired-up rally in Detroit. “It is a project that was built for Trump!”

Launched by the Heritage Foundation, a staunchly conservative DC think tank, Project 2025 is a 900-page plan for action to be set into motion the moment Trump wins reelection. With ideas from hundreds of conservative leaders, it calls for quickly and vastly expanding presidential powers, replacing tens of thousands of government workers with right-wing ideologues, weaponizing the Justice Department to pursue political foes, establishing a nationwide abortion ban, rolling back LGBTQ rights, trashing many environmental regulations, outlawing pornography and much more.

For some conservatives, it is a definitive strategy for draining the swamp. For some Democrats, it is a blueprint for totalitarianism. The explosive document bubbles quietly under the surface of other campaign news for a while, but Biden drags it into the light and, at least on this issue, Trump is on the run.

“I know nothing about Project 2025. I have no idea who is behind it,” the former president says in his ceaseless string of social media posts. “Some of the things they are saying are absolutely ridiculous and abysmal.”

The problem he faces is in the document’s pedigree. According to a CNN review, at least 140 people who formerly worked in the Trump administration helped craft the plan, including many whom Trump still talks to on a regular basis: Ben Carson, Ken Cuccinelli, Mark Meadows, Stephen Miller, Peter Navarro. As much as Trump insists Project 2025 is foreign to him, the ties look suspicious.

What’s more, CNN’s Phil Mattingly says, the document is linked behind the scenes to an army of loyalists lined up by conservative coordinators to step into those government jobs immediately with Project 2025 as their battle plan. “What they’ve been doing in concert with the policy operation,” Mattingly says, “is they’ve been collecting thousands of names, resumes, mapping out exactly where those people would go. You get a bunch of true believers in there, you’re going to actually implement the stuff.”

Biden is also benefiting from other moves Trump cannot easily disown. Just two days after the assassination attempt against the former president in Pennsylvania, on the sleepy first day of the Republican National Convention in battleground Wisconsin, Trump announces his pick for a running mate.

“After lengthy deliberation and thought, and considering the tremendous talents of many others,” Trump writes on Truth Social, “I have decided that the person best suited to assume the position of Vice President of the United States is Senator J.D. Vance of the Great State of Ohio.”

The words are surprisingly effusive considering Vance once called Trump a “moral disaster,” repeatedly suggested he believed Trump had committed sexual assault and was wondered whether he was “America’s Hitler.” But Vance had backtracked as he prepared to run for Senate, telling Fox News in 2021, “I did say those critical things and I regret them, and I regret being wrong about the guy.” Now, with the winds blowing in his favor, Trump has found in the contrite politician a running mate and an eventual heir to the MAGA throne.

But if Republicans are ready to forgive and forget Vance’s former positions, Democrats are not. “Vance will do what Mike Pence wouldn’t on January 6,” Biden campaign chair Jen O’Malley Dillon crows, referring to Trump’s former vice president who stood firm against demands he upend the 2020 election process.

A fundraising appeal from the Biden campaign says, “How does a guy who used to say that Donald Trump and his policies were ‘reprehensible,’ become Donald Trump’s running mate? Through years of being a rubber-stamp for Donald Trump’s extreme, MAGA agenda. You might even say he’s the poster child for Project 2025.”

Vance is attacked over his flipflops, his stand against abortion rights, his attitude toward women — and then the cat lady thing happens.

Three years earlier, as he was vying for the GOP Senate nomination in Ohio, the future VP candidate served up a nugget for the Fox News audience. He griped that the country was being run by “a bunch of childless cat ladies who are miserable at their own lives and the choices that they’ve made and so they want to make the rest of the country miserable, too.” Then he added, “You look at Kamala Harris, Pete Buttigieg, AOC — the entire future of the Democrats is controlled by people without children. And how does it make any sense that we’ve turned our country over to people who don’t really have a direct stake in it?”

When the clip resurfaces, the outcry is instantaneous. Women voters, whom the Trump campaign desperately needs, start posting cat memes sharply critical of Vance’s views. Late-night comedians have a field day.

Trump says his running mate is “not against anything. He loves family, it’s very important to him.” Vance tries to spin the old clip — and others in which he refers to “childless sociopaths” — as sarcasm. The whole mess goes viral anyway, and Trump’s VP pick starts looking like a punchline.

Still, CNN’s Alayna Treene says, with so much good news for Trump, the internal concern over his running mate is muted. “The reporting in the stories about them second-guessing whether they were going to pick somebody else and try to replace Vance was not true,” she says, “(but) they definitely thought it was a bad rollout.”

Public scrutiny of Vance, however, does not take pressure off Biden, and there is little time for laughter at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. Biden’s attempts to quiet the mutiny in his party are crumbling. Calls for him to step out of the race are ricocheting from pundits to major Democratic donors including movie star George Clooney, who had just headlined an event for Biden.

And the stumbles keep coming. At the NATO summit Biden calls Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky “President Putin.” Zelensky laughs it off, but the seriousness of such errors is intensifying. More than two dozen House Democrats are now asking Biden to end his reelection bid. Former President Barack Obama and House Speaker Emeritus Nancy Pelosi are not telling Biden to abandon his run, but they are voicing concerns. Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer shares his firsthand account of the unrest among his caucus when he visits Biden at his beach house in Delaware where the president is recovering from what is reported to be a case of Covid.

At the center of the issue is math. It is an axiom of presidential elections that when a Democrat and a Republican are tied in national polls, the Democrat is often losing. Democratic voters are more heavily clustered in urban areas where they can help their party win a state by huge margins. Republicans, who are more spread out, may win their states by smaller raw numbers, but they collect all the electoral votes in those states anyway. The polling models are adjusted after each election to account for imperfections, so perhaps this time will see the electoral field releveled. But recent history tells a simple story: Biden tallied a 4-percentage point edge in the popular vote against Trump in 2020 and won. Hillary Clinton secured a popular lead of roughly 2 percentage points in 2016 and lost. The polls suggest Biden is trailing her numbers now.

Make no mistake, Biden is a hero for many Democrats; the guy who emerged from what they saw as the chaos of Trump’s first term, pushed the MAGA leader out of the Oval Office, and took the nation back toward something that felt more normal. And Biden, who still traces so much of the turn in his fortunes to that cursed debate, is not surrendering. Not yet.

“What I call Biden’s ‘stubborn Irish’ kicked in,” CNN’s John King says, parroting the president’s defense. “‘It was just one night. It wasn’t as bad as you think. We can recover.’”

Yet each time Biden has a strong speech, a quick joke or a firm stride, he invariably sputters in his next appearance with misstatements, forgotten names and the shuffling gait of advanced age. Some in the party say the lack of consensus on whether Biden should stay or go is turning into a “doom loop” weakening his bid through sheer uncertainty.

“People see and feel the walls closing in,” a senior Democratic player says.

And Trump is steaming toward the biggest night of his convention looking confident, strong and perhaps unbeatable.

Trump’s crowning night in Milwaukee

“Let Trump-a-mania run wild! Let Trump-a-mania rule again!”

Wrestler Hulk Hogan is hyping the crowd at the Republican National Convention. Tearing off a black T-shirt emblazoned with an American flag to reveal a red Trump-Vance shirt beneath, he invokes an oddly apt phrase for fans and foes alike to describe the former president’s approach to government.

“Let Trump-a-mania make America great again!”

For days, the RNC has been pure celebration. Speaker after speaker has competed to raise the highest praise for Trump and the worst damnation of Democrats. The official party platform reads less like the dry policy documents of old, and more like a Trump speech packed with grandiose claims and questionable facts. Few in the room betray the slightest doubt that in the final rounds of the election, Trump will fling Biden from the ring like a rag doll.

For Trump, his dominance over Biden in the past three weeks has clearly sweetened everything about this convocation. Teamsters President Sean O’Brien is head of a labor union that had endorsed Hillary Clinton and Biden in past years, but mindful of the rising tide of Trump supporters in his organization, he takes the stage to salute the former president as “one tough SOB.” Trump’s former primary challengers have been bowing before him and disavowing their own criticism from just months before: South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, tech entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy, and the last holdout, former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley. She infuriated the Trump faithful earlier in the year by refusing to quit the race and calling him “toxic.” At the convention, her defiance turns to abject surrender as she says, “Donald Trump has my strong endorsement, period.”

Beaming from his seat in Milwaukee’s Fiserv Forum, Trump takes in the spectacle of the Grand Old Party entirely within his thrall. With a large white bandage over the ear injured in the assassination attempt, he looks happy in the moment and deeply pleased that Hogan is sharing it with him.

The perennial wrestling all-star was a key figure when Trump first fell in love with the melodrama and money tied to professional wrestling. Trump brought it all to Atlantic City in the late 1980s, launching a decadeslong relationship with the spectacles of sweat and spandex. Sometimes he took part: strutting around arenas as crowds cheered and booed, luxuriating in the “extra” of it all. He landed a spot in the celebrity wing of the World Wrestling Entertainment Hall of Fame, alongside Mr. T, Ozzy Osbourne and the late comedian, Andy Kaufman. Trump’s affection for the exhibitions is understandable. Pro wrestling is athletic, but not really a sport. It has winners and losers, but they are predetermined. Champions are anointed mainly based on fictional storylines, not the hard facts of their prowess.

As Chauncey DeVega wrote for Salon in 2015, Trump’s first presidential bid was deeply rooted in the “outsize characters and operatic storylines” of pro wrestling. Good versus evil. Ultimate victory or ultimate defeat. Champions and chumps.

As the crowd cheers Trump to the podium for his centerpiece speech on the RNC’s final night, it is easy to see how those black-and-white paradigms resonate against the gray uncertainty of the times. In the eight years since he won the White House, Trump has forced the Republican Party to embrace his view that anything except complete loyalty is betrayal; anything short of absolute domination is failure; and God-fearing Americans will lose everything they love about their county if he is not putting his feet up on the Resolute Desk again next January.

“Four months from now, we will have an incredible victory and we will begin the four greatest years in the history of our country,” he says, launching into an address that defeated candidates seldom get to make. But tonight, he is no loser. In this hall, the adoring crowd believes he won the last election. They believe they were cheated. They know Biden is on the ropes.

Some of those evangelical Christians admit his multiple marriages, alleged sexual escapades, profane language, brutish behavior, lies and crimes are troubling. But they are also spellbound by how he weathers the scandals, financial setbacks and criminal prosecutions. Persecutions, he has said, invoking a word with deep resonance in the Christian faith. As he stands before them, many see not a man, but a leader sent from heaven to rule a nation created by God. This is not the acceptance of a nomination. This is the acclamation of his coming victory.

“Together we will launch a new era of safety, prosperity and freedom for citizens of every race, religion, color and creed,” Trump says. “The discord and division in our society must be healed. … We rise together, or we fall apart. I am running to be president for all America, not half of America.”

For almost 10 minutes he follows the script of unity and reconciliation promised by his campaign in the wake of the assassination attempt, and the folks in the crowd — including dozens wearing their own ear bandages in solidarity — nod along. Then he will ramble off into another hour and 20 minutes of accusations, grievances and falsehoods leaving even stalwarts looking at their watches.

But before he spins into that untethered space, he tells the story no showman could resist. A beautiful afternoon filled with bullets and blood. An audience not running from the mortal threat but standing firm as their leader sank. That leader rising — unbowed.

“I’m not supposed to be here tonight. I’m not supposed to be here,” he says solemnly.

“Yes, you are!” the crowd shouts back again and again.

“Thank you, but I’m not,” Trump says, shaking his head and shifting from wrestler to penitent. “I stand before you in this arena only by the grace of almighty God.”

He and his fans seize the passion. They bask in the pageantry. But even though Trump is casting himself as the martyr, within days it will seem he was playing the prophet.
